
KTAP design
-----------

Q: Why use bytecode design?
A: Using bytecode would be a clean and lightweight solution,
   you don't need gcc toolchain to compile every scripts, all you
   need is a ktapvm kernel modules and userspace tool called ktap.
   since its language virtual machine design, it have great portability,
   suppose you are working at a multi-arch cluster, if you want to run
   a tracing script on each board, you won't need cross-compile tracing
   script onto all board, what you really need to do is use ktap tool
   to run script just in time.

   bytecode based design also will make executing more safer, than native code
   generation.

   Reality already showing that systemtap is not widely used in embedd Linux,
   caused by problem of systemtap's architecture design choice, it's a natual
   design for Rehat and IBM, because Redhat/IBM is focusing on server area,
   not embedd area.

Q: What's the differences with Systemtap and Dtrace?
A: For systemtap, the answer is already mentioned at above question,
   systemtap use translator design, for trade-off on performance with usability,
   based on GCC, that's what ktap want to solve.

   For Dtrace, one common design with Dtrace is also use bytecode, so basically
   Dtrace and ktap is on the same road. there have some projects aim to porting
   Dtrace from Solaris to Linux, but the process is still on the road, Dtrace
   is rooted in solaris, and there have many huge differences between solaris
   tracing infrastructure with Linux's.

   Dtrace is based on D language, a language subset of C, it's a restricted
   language, like without for-looping, for safty use in production system.
   It seems that Dtrace for Linux only support x86 architecture, not work on
   powerpc and arm/mips, obvirously it's not suit for embeded Linux currently.

   Dtrace use ctf as input for debuginfo handing, compare with vmlinux for
   Systemtap.

   On the license part, Dtrace is released as CDDL, which is incompatable with
   GPL(this is why it's impossible to upstream Dtrace into mainline).


Q: Why use dynamically typed language? but not statically typed language?
A: It's hard to say which one is more better than other, dynamically typed
   language bring efficiency and fast prototype production, but loosing type
   check at compiling phase, and easy to make mistake in runtime, also it's
   need many runtime checking, In contrast, statically typed language win on
   programing safety, and performance. statically language would suit for 
   interoperate with kernel, as kernel is wrote mainly in C, Need to note that
   systemtap and Dtrace both is statically language.

   ktap choose dynamically typed language as initial implementation.


Q: Why we need ktap for event tracing? there already have a built-in ftrace
A: This also is a common question for all dynamic tracing tool, not only ktap.
   ktap provide more flexibility than built-in tracing infrastructure. suppose
   you need print a global variable when tracepoint hit, or you want print
   backtrace, even more, you want to store some info into associative array, and
   display it in histogram style when tracing end, in these case, some of them
   ftrace can take it, some of them ftrace can not.
   Overall, ktap provide you with great flexibility to scripting your own trace
   need.


Q: How about the performance? is ktap slow?
A: ktap is not slow, the bytecode is very high-level, based on lua, the language
   virtual machine is register-based(compare with stack-based), with little
   instruction, the table data structure is heavily optimized in ktapvm.
   ktap use per-cpu allocation in many place, without global locking scheme,
   it's very fast when executing tracepoint callback.
   Performance benchmark showing that the overhead of ktap running is nearly
   10%(store event name into associative array), compare with full speed
   running without any tracepoint enabled.

   ktap will optimize overhead all the time, hopefully the overhead will
   decrease to little than 5%, even more.


Q: Why not porting a high level language implementation into kernel directly?
   like python/JVM?
A: I take serious on the size of vm and memory footprint. python vm is large,
   it's not suit to embed into kernel, and python have some functionality
   which we don't need.
   The bytecode of other high level language is also big, ktap only have 32
   bytecodes, python/java/erlang have nearly two hundred bytecodes.
   There also have some problems when porting those language into kernel,
   userspace programming have many differences with kernel programming,
   like float numbers, handle sleeping code carefully in kernel, deadloop is
   not allowed in kernel, multi-thread management, etc.., so it's impossible
   to porting language implementation into kernel with little adaption work.


Q: What's the status of ktap now?
A: Basically it works on x86-32, x86-64, powerpc, arm, it also could work for
   other hardware architecture, but not proven yet(I don't have enough hardware
   to test)
   If you found some bug, fix it on you own programming skill, or report to me.


Q: How to hack ktap? I want to write some extensions onto ktap.
A: welcome hacking.
   You can write your own library to fulfill your specific need,
   you can write any script as you want.


Q: What's the plan of ktap? any roadmap?
A: the current plan is deliver stable ktapvm kernel modules, more ktap script,
and bugfix.


